---
layout: post
title: dynamic timer and power management
category: linux
---
In my opinion, the weakness of current mobile devices is not it's looking nor it's functions, it's the battery. It's worth to do some investigate about the power management.
Power saving is complex, it's depends on the HW design, the CPU, the OS and also the user application. This article focus on the OS side.

On Linux, the power management is implemented by the `dynamic timer subsystem`, and `cpuidle subsystem?`.

#Power sources
Want to control the power consume? First need to know the who eat the most power, the clocks, voltage domains, memory, device driver, and power IC.

#dynamic timer
At the begining, the OS do the schedule by the fixed ticks, for i386, 100Hz first and then changed to 1000Hz`various depends on the processor arch`, the pros of fixed ticks is **simple**, there is a timer interrupt registered to the OS, and each time the tick comes, the timer interupt is happened, and something`updating timer, decrementing the currently running process's timeslice, expiring timers(sleep/poll/select/timer)` can be done at that moment. The ticks is fixed, so the user can rely on the tick. The cons is it's always has tradeoff to select the **right** tick interval, too long lower the accuracy; too short waste the processor timer to handle the timer interrupt, and make the processor wake up 100/1000 times every second, the processor cannot go into deep sleep, eating battery.  
The `hrtimer` merged at 2.6.16 and `tickless` merged at 2.6.21.

##How to configure the ticks
The ticks is decided by the kernel macro `CONFIG_HZ`, the value is configured when doing kernel make, and setted when kernel boot up.  

```sh  
[root@localhost ~]# cat /usr/src/linux-3.12.1/include/asm-generic/param.h    
#ifndef __ASM_GENERIC_PARAM_H
#define __ASM_GENERIC_PARAM_H

#include <uapi/asm-generic/param.h>

# undef HZ
# define HZ             CONFIG_HZ       /* Internal kernel timer frequency */
# define USER_HZ        100             /* some user interfaces are */
# define CLOCKS_PER_SEC (USER_HZ)       /* in "ticks" like times() */
#endif /* __ASM_GENERIC_PARAM_H */

#cpuidle
```

```sh  
[root@localhost ~]# cat /boot/config-`uname -r` | grep HZ
CONFIG_NO_HZ=y
# CONFIG_HZ_100 is not set
# CONFIG_HZ_250 is not set
# CONFIG_HZ_300 is not set
CONFIG_HZ_1000=y
CONFIG_HZ=1000
CONFIG_MACHZ_WDT=m
```

In detail, beside the `CONFIG_HZ`, there are other macros used to configure the ticks.

- Never omit scheduling-clock ticks (`CONFIG_HZ_PERIODIC=y` or `CONFIG_NO_HZ=n` for older kernels).  
Usually used in heavy workloads with lots of tasks that use short bursts of CPU, if you are instead running a light workload with long idle periods, failing to omit scheduling-clock interrupts will result in excessive power consumption.  
- Omit scheduling-clock ticks on idle CPUs (`CONFIG_NO_HZ_IDLE=y` or `CONFIG_NO_HZ=y` for older kernels).  
Usually as **default** configuration, also be called as `dyntick-idle mode`. A battery-powered device running a `CONFIG_HZ_PERIODIC=y` kernel would drain its battery very quickly, easily 2-3 times as fast as would the same device running a `CONFIG_NO_HZ_IDLE=y` kernel.  
But the pros is not free, more instructions need to execute to and from the idle loop, and increase the number of clock-reprograming operations.  
- Omit scheduling-clock ticks on CPUs that are either idle or that have only one runnable task (`CONFIG_NO_HZ_FULL=y`).   
In this case, your system must have at least two CPUs in order for `CONFIG_NO_HZ_FULL=y` to do anything for you. At least one non-adaptive-tick CPU must remain online to handle timekeeping tasks.  
Adaptive-ticks slows user/kernel transitions slightly.

##How to enbale tickless feature
Select the `CONFIG_NO_HZ=y` when do kconfig.

#TODO
- If enable tickless feature, that's to say there is no fixed interval tick anymore, then how the timer/sleep/poll work?

#References
[What is a tickless kernel](http://www.quora.com/What-is-a-tickless-kernel)
[hrtimers](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/timers/highres.txt)
[NO_HZ](https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/timers/NO_HZ.txt)
