---
layout: post
title: The issue about scanf
category: C
---
Yesterday, someone asked me to work with him to do a online coding test, the test is easy, but there is a strang issue, get to understand until today.

##The issue

Here is the example of the code:

```c
01.#include <stdio.h>
02.#include <string.h>
03.int main()
04.{
05.   char str[100][20];
06.   int i, n;
07.   printf("input the number:");
08.   scanf("%d", &n);
09.   printf("The number is %d\n", n);
10.   for (i=0; i<n; i++) {
11.       fgets(str[i], 20, stdin);
12.   }
13.   return 0;
14.}
```

The issue is when I input the number `n=3`, only 2 strings were accepted. With gdb, when I input the number, the program not stop at line 11 to wait for new input, just go and start the 2nd loop.

The root cause is because I input the number AND the CRLF, but `scanf("%d", &n)` only read number, so the `fgets()` read the remain CRLF, and put the CRLF into the `str`. 

So the question now is about "When scanf stop reading a string".

> A ...scanf function might stop scanning a particular input field before reaching the normal field-end character (whitespace), or it might terminate entirely.
> **Stop and Skip to Next Input Field**
> The various ...scanf functions stop scanning and storing the current input field and proceed to the next one if any of the following occurs:
> - A precision character (*) appears after the % in the format specifier. The current input field is scanned but not stored.
> - width characters have been read.
> - The next character read cannot be converted under the current format (for example, an A when the format is decimal).
> - The next character in the input field does not appear in the search set (or does appear in an inverted search set).
> When scanf stops scanning the current input field for one of these reasons, it assumes that the next character is unread and is either:
> - The first character of the following input field, or
> - The first character in a subsequent read operation on the input.
>
> **Terminate**
> ...scanf functions will terminate under the following circumstances:
> - The next character in the input field conflicts with a corresponding non-whitespace character in the format string.
> - The next character in the input field is EOF.
> - The format string has been exhausted.
> If a character sequence that is not part of a format specifier occurs in the format string, it must match the current sequence of characters in the input field.
> ......scanf functions will scan but not store the matched characters.
> When a conflicting character occurs, it remains in the input field as if the ...scanf function never read it.

Example code:

```c
// store an unsigned, read all whitespace, then store a long int:
scanf("%u %ld", &c, &b);

// store an int, read whitespace, read "blendo", read whitespace,
// and store a float:
scanf("%d blendo %f", &a, &d);

// read all whitespace, then store all characters up to a newline
scanf(" %[^\n]", s);

// store a float, read (and ignore) an int, then store a double:
scanf("%f %*d %lf", &d, &e);

// store 10 characters:
scanf("%10c", s);
```

##The fix
To fix the issue, one approach is replace the line 8 from `scanf` to `fgets`, so the CRLF also be read out;
Or just add `fgetc(stdin)` after line 8;
Or replace line 11 with `scanf` instead of `fgets`. But `scanf` is not recommand to use because it's has no buffer overflow protection.


##Referene
[When scanf stop scanning](http://docwiki.embarcadero.com/RADStudio/XE8/en/When_...scanf_Stops_Scanning)
[beej's c programming guide](http://beej.us/guide/bgc/output/html/multipage/scanf.html)

